ate) 


Libraries _) ; : 
Ph UNIVERSITY of PENNSYLVANIA Manuscript Studies 





Volume 5 | Issue 1 Article 6 


How Many Glyphs and How Many Scribes? Digital Paleography 
and the Voynich Manuscript 


Lisa Fagin Davis 
Medieval Academy of America, lfd@themedievalacademy.org 


Follow this and additional works at: https://repository.upenn.edu/mss_sims 


Go Part of the Digital Humanities Commons, and the Medieval Studies Commons 


Recommended Citation 

Davis, Lisa Fagin () "How Many Glyphs and How Many Scribes? Digital Paleography and the Voynich 
Manuscript," Manuscript Studies: Vol. 5: Iss. 1, Article 6. 

Available at: https://repository.upenn.edu/mss_sims/vol5/iss1/6 


This paper is posted at ScholarlyCommons. https://repository.upenn.edu/mss_sims/vol5/iss1/6 
For more information, please contact repository@pobox.upenn.edu. 


How Many Glyphs and How Many Scribes? Digital Paleography and the Voynich 
Manuscript 


Abstract 

It can be safely claimed that there is no medieval script that has been seen, analyzed, and debated more 
than that of the mysterious and as-yet-unread Voynich Manuscript (Beinecke MS 408). For centuries, 
bibliophiles, linguists, codicologists, art historians, and amateur cryptologists have pored over the 
manuscript, examining it from every angle, debating every wormhole, arguing over every stain and crease. 
Some things we know: the invented script is comprised of carefully-written glyphs without precedent or 
obvious model; forensic material evidence has determined that the parchment, ink, and pigments date 
from the early 15th century; the provenance trail is nearly unbroken from the seventeenth century to today. 
But we still don’t know how to read it, in spite of new theories flying across the internet on a near-weekly 
basis. “Voynichologists” disagree as to some of the most important and basic questions about the 
manuscript. How many letterforms are there? How many scribes can be identified? Are there ligatures, 
majuscules, abbreviations, and other scribal conventions? These questions have never been satisfactorily 
answered. Using digital paleographic methodologies including the Archetype (DigiPal) application and 
other annotation tools, this project will revisit the paleographic analyses of the Voynich glyphs to propose 
answers to some of these questions and discuss how these answers open avenues for further research. 


Keywords 
paleography, codicology, Voynich manuscript, cryptology, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, 
Manuscript Studies 


This annotations is available in Manuscript Studies: htips://repository.upenn.edu/mss_sims/vol5/iss1/6 


Davis: Digital Paleography and the Voynich Manuscript 


MANUSCRIPT STUDIES 


A Journal of the Schoenberg Institute for Manuscript Studies 


VOLUME 5, NUMBER 1 


(Spring 2020) 


Manuscript Studies (ISSN 2381-5329) is published semiannually 
by the University of Pennsylvania Press 


The Schoenberg Institute 
for Manuscript Studies 


UNIVERSITY Of PENNSYLVANIA LIBRARIES 





Published by ScholarlyCommons, 


Manuscript Studies, Vol. 5 [], Iss. 1, Art. 6 


MANUSCRIPT STUDIES 


VOLUME 5, NUMBER 1 
(Spring 2020) 


ISSN 2381-5329 


Copyright © 2020 University of Pennsylvania Libraries 
and University of Pennsylvania Press. All rights reserved. 


Published by the University of Pennsylvania Press, 
3905 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104. 


Printed in the U.S.A. on acid-free paper. 


Manuscript Studies brings together scholarship from around the world and across disciplines 
related to the study of premodern manuscript books and documents, with a special emphasis 
on the role of digital technologies in advancing manuscript research. Articles for submission 
should be prepared according to the Chicago Manual of Style, 16" edition, and follow the style 
guidelines found at http://mss.pennpress.org. 


None of the contents of this journal may be reproduced without prior written consent of the 
University of Pennsylvania Press. Authorization to photocopy is granted by the University of 
Pennsylvania Press for libraries or other users registered with Copyright Clearance Center 
(CCC) Transaction Reporting Service, provided that all required fees are verified with CCC 
and paid directly to CCC, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. This consent does not 
extend to other kinds of copying for general distribution, for advertising or promotional pur- 
poses, for creating new collective works, for database retrieval, or for resale. 


2020 SUBSCRIPTION INFORMATION: 

Single issues: $30 

Print and online subscriptions: Individuals: $40; Institutions: $94; Full-time Students: $30 
International subscribers, please add $19 per year for shipping. 

Online-only subscriptions: Individuals: $32; Institutions: $82 


Please direct all subscription orders, inquiries, requests for single issues, address changes, and 
other business communications to Penn Press Journals, 3905 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 
19104. Phone: 215-573-1295. Fax: 215-746-3636. Email: journals@pobox.upenn.edu. Prepay- 
ment is required. Orders may be charged to MasterCard, Visa, and American Express credit 
cards. Checks and money orders should be made payable to “University of Pennsylvania 
Press” and sent to the address printed directly above. 


One-year subscriptions are valid January 1 through December 31. Subscriptions received after 
October 31 in any year become effective the following January 1. Subscribers joining midyear 
receive immediately copies of all issues of Manuscript Studies already in print for that year. 


Postmaster: send address changes to Penn Press Journals, 3905 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104. 


Visit Manuscript Studies on the web at mss.pennpress.org. 


https://repository.upenn.edu/mss_sims/vol5/iss1/6 


Davis: Digital Paleography and the Voynich Manuscript 


MANUSCRIPT STUDIES 


A Journal of the Schoenberg Institute for Manuscript Studies 


VOLUME §5, NUMBER 1 


Yemeni Manuscripts Online: Digitization in an Age 
of War and Loss 


Nancy UM 1 


Opening the Text in the Floreffe Bible (London, BL Add. MS 
17738): From Ways of Seeing to Ways of Touching 


DOMINIC MARNER 45 


Litterae florissae in English Manuscripts in the Late Twelfth/ 
Early Thirteenth Century 


SARA CHARLES 79 


The Durham Latin Prose “Brut” to 1347 with a Continuation 
to 1348: A Nationalistic Chronicle of England and Its 
Manuscripts 


TREVOR RUSSELL SMITH 120 


A Brief Introduction to Seventeenth-Century Military 
Manuscripts and Military Literacy 


LUCIAN STAIANO-DANIELS 142 


Annotations 


How Many Glyphs and How Many Scribes? Digital 
Paleography and the Voynich Manuscript 
Lisa FaGIN Davis 164 


In the Orbit of the Sphere: Sacrobosco’s De sphaera mundi in 


UPenn MS Codex 1881 


AYLIN MALCOLM 181 


Published by ScholarlyCommons, 


Manuscript Studies, Vol. 5 [], Iss. 1, Art. 6 


iv | JouURNAL FOR MANUSCRIPT STUDIES 


Reviews 


Erik Kwakkel and Rodney Thompson, eds. The European 
Book in the Twelfth Century. 


JOANNA FRONSKA 203 


Paul M. Love, Jr. Ibadi Muslims of North Africa: Manuscripts, 
Mobilization, and the Making of a Written Tradition. 


AMANDA PROPST 206 


Jeffrey F. Hamburger, Robert Suckale, and Gude Suckale- 
Redlefsen, eds. Painting the Page in the Age of Print: Central 
European Manuscript Illumination of the Fifteenth Century. 


GREGORY CLARK 210 


Erik Kwakkel, ed. Vernacular Manuscript Culture, 1000-1500. 


HaNnnaH Morcos 214 


Gaudenz Freuler. The McCarthy Collection, Volume I: 
Italian and Byzantine Miniatures. 


BRYAN C. KEENE 218 


List of Manuscripts Cited 223 


https://repository.upenn.edu/mss_sims/vol5/iss1/6 


Davis: Digital Paleography and the Voynich Manuscript 


How Many Glyphs and How Many Scribes? 
Digital Paleography and the Voynich Manuscript 


Lisa FAGIN Davis 
Medieval Academy of America 


HERE IS NO MEDIEVAL manuscript that has been seen, studied, 

analyzed, and debated more than the mysterious and as-yet-unread 

Voynich Manuscript (Yale University, Beinecke Rare Book and 
Manuscript Library MS 408).! The manuscript is so infamous that medie- 
valists and other scholars have been conditioned to roll their eyes when the 
very name is mentioned. It is easy to forget that underneath the media 
buzz and unsubstantiated theories lies an actual medieval object well wor- 
thy of study, six hundred years old, with a lengthy and fascinating recorded 
history.” 





The preliminary results of this ongoing study were presented at the 2019 International Con- 
gress on Medieval Studies (Kalamazoo, Michigan). 

1 See https://beinecke.library-yale.edu/collections/highlights/voynich-manuscript (accessed 
24 May 2019) for documentation, description, bibliography, and a full set of open-access, high- 
resolution images. 

2 Barbara Shailor, Catalogue of Medieval and Renaissance Manuscripts in the Beinecke Rare 
Book and Manuscript Library, Yale University, Vol. 2: MSS 251-500 (Binghamton, NY: Medi- 
eval & Renaissance Texts & Studies, 1987), 303-7 (available at https://pre1600ms.beinecke. 
library.yale.edu/docs/pre1600.ms408.HTM, accessed 24 May 2019); Seymour De Ricci and 
W. J. Wilson, Census of Medieval and Renaissance Manuscripts in the United States and Canada 
(New York: Bibliographical Society of America, 1937), 2:1146-47; René Zandbergen, “Earli- 


Published by ScholarlyCommons, 


Manuscript Studies, Vol. 5 [], Iss. 1, Art. 6 
Davis, Glyphs and Scribes | 165 


The Voynich Manuscript is written using an otherwise unknown collec- 
tion of symbols known as “Voynichese,” with linguistically identifiable 
roots, prefixes, and suffixes, as well as repeating orthographic and gram- 
matical patterns. Recent linguistic analyses suggest that Voynichese repre- 
sents a natural—and as yet unidentified—human language; it is not 
gibberish, and it is not an invented language like Elvish or Klingon.’ The 
appeal of the Voynich is amplified by its illustrations, which include uniden- 
tifiable but detailed and realistic plants, circular zodiacal and astronomical 
diagrams, crowned nude women bathing in green or blue pools, and other 
illustrations that defy description. 

For centuries, bibliophiles, linguists, codicologists, art historians, and 
cryptologists both professional and amateur have pored over the manuscript 
and its images, examining it from every angle, debating every pen- and 
brushstroke, arguing over every wormhole, stain, and crease. Some of the 
greatest cryptological minds and mathematicians of the twentieth and 
twenty-first centuries have devoted years, even decades, to the codex.‘ 
Enormous computing power has been devoted to linguistic analysis, in 
efforts to discern patterns that might point toward a particular encoded 
language. The lack of decryption success has led some to believe it to be 
gibberish, an elaborate hoax. Others believe that the mysterious glyphs 
represent a phonemic transcription of an unwritten medieval language, as 
opposed to an encoded written language. Dozens of solutions have been 
proposed in the past century alone, most of them more aspirational than 
they are substantive. The first formal published solution, in the 1920s, 
argued that the Voynich was written by Roger Bacon.° Others have credited 
it to Leonardo da Vinci, or claimed that the manuscript is European but 





est Owners,” in The Voynich Manuscript, ed. Raymond Clemens (New Haven, CT: Yale Uni- 
versity Press, 2016), 3-9. 

3. Marcelo A. Montemurro and Damian H. Zanette, “Keywords and Co-Occurrence Pat- 
terns in the Voynich Manuscript: An Information-Theoretic Analysis,” in PLoS ONE 8, 
no. 6: e66344, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0066344 (accessed 25 May 2019). 

4 William Sherman, “Cryptographic Attempts,” in The Voynich Manuscript, ed. Clemens, 
39-44. 

5 William Romaine Newbold and Roland G. Kent, The Cipher of Roger Bacon (Philadel- 
phia: University Press, 1928). 


https://repository.upenn.edu/mss_sims/vol5/iss1/6 


Davis: Digital Paleography and the Voynich Manuscript 


166 | JouRNAL FOR MANUSCRIPT STUDIES 


the plants are Mesoamerican. Recent chemical analyses, however, concluded 
that the oak gall ink and the mineral and botanical pigments are consistent 
with medieval recipes, and carbon-14 analysis has dated the parchment to 
between 1404 and 1438.° That rules out Roger Bacon (who was already 
dead), da Vinci (who had not been born), and post-contact Mesoamerica. 

“Voynichologists” disagree as to some of the most important and 
basic questions about the manuscript. How many letterforms are there? 
How many scribes can be identified? Are there ligatures, majuscules, abbre- 
viations, and other scribal conventions? These questions have never been 
satisfactorily answered. This paper will present the preliminary results of a 
formal paleographic analysis of the Voynich Manuscript using traditional 
methodologies as well as digital tools such as the Archetype (DigiPal) 
application, VisColl, and the Mirador shared-canvas viewer. 

Efforts to analyze the text of the Voynich involve analyses of letter fre- 
quency and combinations, as well as the identification of roots, prefixes, 
interfixes, and suffixes. Computers are unable to parse these unique glyphs, 
so Voynichologists have developed various systems of Roman-letter and 
-symbol substitutions for Voynich characters to facilitate computational 
analytics. The most commonly used substitution scheme is the Extensible 
Voynich Alphabet (EVA), a relatively small character set that combines 
basic components to create some of the more complicated symbols.’ The 
substitution scheme known as v101 is much more expansive, and there is 
some debate in Voynichology circles about which of the half-dozen substi- 
tution schemes is most useful. The results of any analysis depend on which 
substitution is used, and the results of linguistic analyses can vary signifi- 
cantly from one system to another. In other words, in Voynich studies, as in 
everything else, methodology matters. 

In the 1970s, Captain Prescott Currier discerned two different patterns 
of letter frequency and glyph combinations on different sets of leaves. He 





6 See letter from Joseph Barabe, Senior Research Microscopist and Director of Scientific 
Imaging, McCrone Associates, Inc., to Kevin Rupp, Curator of Modern European Books 
and Manuscripts, available at https://beinecke.library.yale.edu/sites/default/files/files/voynich 
_analysis.pdf (accessed 24 May 2019). 

7 See René Zandbergen, “Text Analysis—Transliteration of the Text,” at http://voynich.nu/ 
transcr.html (accessed 24 May 2019) for details on the various substitution systems. 


Published by ScholarlyCommons, 


Manuscript Studies, Vol. 5 [], Iss. 1, Art. 6 
Davis, Glyphs and Scribes | 167 





= = Voynich Manuscript Der 





FIGURE 1. BRBL MS 408, fols. 31v (Scribe 2) and 32r (Scribe 1). 


called these Language A and Language B (it would be more conservative to 
use “dialect” instead of “language,” and so that is the term used below).® 
Currier also, quite correctly, discerned two primary hands at work in the 
first—the botanical—section of the manuscript, Scribe 1 and Scribe 2, not- 
ing a direct correlation between Dialect A and Scribe 1, and Dialect B and 
Scribe 2. The distinction between Scribe 1 and Scribe 2 is quite obvious—in 
figure 1, for example (consecutive pages 31v and 32r), Scribe 2 and Scribe 1 
are easily distinguishable, with Scribe 2 on the left and Scribe 1 on the 
right. He attempted to identify the hands elsewhere in the manuscript, but 
his work beyond the botanical section is incomplete, halfhearted, and 
somewhat unconvincing, and no trained paleographer or codicologist has 
revisited the relationship between scripts, dialects, and structure in the 
Voynich Manuscript since Currier publicized his observations in the 1970s. 
Currier himself once said that he was not entirely certain about his conclu- 
sions and that the problem required the attention of a trained paleographer.’ 
The world’s acknowledged expert on the manuscript, René Zandbergen, 
has also put out the call for an “expert paleographer” to address the question 





8  Currier’s unpublished work is available at http://www.voynich.nu/extra/curr_main.html 
(accessed 24 May 2019). 

9 See “Questions and Discussion” at http://www.voynich.nu/extra/curr_main.html (accessed 
24 May 2019). 


https://repository.upenn.edu/mss_sims/vol5/iss1/6 


Davis: Digital Paleography and the Voynich Manuscript 


168 | JOURNAL FOR MANUSCRIPT STUDIES 


of scripts and scribes.'° This was the motivation for the present project, 
undertaken by a trained medieval paleographer/codicologist. 

The discipline of paleography involves three skill sets: (1) understanding 
the history of particular styles of script in order to establish date and place 
of origin (attribution); (2) learning how to read letterforms and expand 
abbreviations in different scripts (literacy); and (3) studying graphic features 
of letterforms as well as general script characteristics in order to classify and 
distinguish different hands (description). As far as the Voynich is concerned, 
numbers 1 and 2 cannot be accomplished. The development of this script 
cannot be studied because this is the only known example. And no one is 
capable of reading it, as of yet. What of number 3, description? Due to its 
unique nature, the Voynich presents an interesting paleographical problem, 
from a theoretical as well as a practical perspective. Can the methods and 
methodologies of Latin paleography be applied to the unique glyph set of 
the Voynich Manuscript? Using an application called Archetype, they can."! 

Archetype is an online tool for digital paleography that combines image 
annotation with a customizable data model and a powerful search engine. 
One of the fundamental principles of the Archetype model is that each 
annotated character must be attached to a predefined character tag, using 
machine-readable letters and symbols that can then be made discoverable. 
The Voynich glyphs are not machine-readable, so one of the substitution 
schemes needs to be chosen to provide the discoverable tag set. 

It is important to at least acknowledge the question underlying the dis- 
tinction between EVA, v101, and other transcription systems: How many 
distinct characters are there in Voynichese? It is not entirely obvious. The 
most common characters establish a basic set of around thirty (see fig. 2 for 
the thirty-four most common, established by counting occurrences in the 
v101 transcription). These are glyphs with an occurrence frequency rang- 
ing from 15 percent down to 0.1 percent. This is a similar frequency range 
to that found in English, where [e] has a frequency of around 12 percent, 





10 See http://voynich.nu/writing. html#handwr (accessed 24 May 2019). 
11 See https://archetype.ink (accessed 24 May 2019). 
12 Available at http://www.voynich.nu/data/voyn_101.txt (accessed 24 May 2019). 


Published by ScholarlyCommons, 


Manuscript Studies, Vol. 5 [], Iss. 1, Art. 6 
Davis, Glyphs and Scribes | 169 





Grapheme Frequency, V101 


sg 
If 


16.0000% 
14.0000% 
12.0000% 


ia — » oO 
ce 


~ w + . 


& 3 a 
§ ct 
w ul 
be : 
on. = 


© Fa cag 8 FQ fH+tweu sc 2 vg deo Pee 2qeum rs £ Pw 


10,0000% 


8.0000% 


6.0000% 


4.0000% 


2.0000% 


0.0000% 














FIGURE 2. Voynichese grapheme frequency (using v101 transcription). 


and [z], 0.07 percent. This group tends to be included in any glyph set. But 
the full glyph set includes another fifteen to twenty very rare symbols, such 
as those circled in red in figure 3. How should these be counted? Are they 
variants of more common glyphs? Are they numbers or abbreviations? And 
what of the common “bench-gallows” glyphs, in which et is combined 
with a “gallows” character such as If to create d? Are they distinct letter- 
forms, bigraphs, ligatures, abbreviations? EVA considers them bigraphs, 
like [qu] or [ch], while vl101 considers them to be separate and distinct 
glyphs, giving v101 a larger glyph set than EVA. For linguistic computational 
analyses, the choice of substitution scheme is extremely important and will 
directly impact the outcome. Because EVA, the Extensible Voynich Alpha- 
bet, is composed of elements of glyphs that must be combined to establish 
the correct substitutions, combinations that may require multiple Roman 
letters or symbols, it is not an appropriate choice for Archetype. V101, the 
more expansive substitution scheme, is a better fit for the needs of the 


https://repository.upenn.edu/mss_sims/vol5/iss1/6 


Davis: Digital Paleography and the Voynich Manuscript 


170 | JouRNAL FOR MANUSCRIPT STUDIES 





FIGURE 3. BRBL MS 408, fol. 57v detail. 


Archetype data model and was adopted for the present project, Voynich- 
Pal (fig. 4)."° 

Archetype allows users to annotate images with discoverable facets, then 
search for annotations on combinations of those facets, pulling the result- 
ing annotations out of their images and into a lightbox where they can be 
studied and manipulated. When applied to the Voynich Manuscript, this 
methodology facilitates the identification of which hands wrote on which 
leaves, which bifolia, which quires, and which sections, and allows for an 
analysis of how, and if, different scribes collaborated. I initially annotated 
several different characters, but, after spending some time looking closely at 
different glyphs, I decided to focus initially on the single-loop gallows glyph 
that, in v101, is arbitrarily called “h” (the substitutions rarely have a seman- 
tic correspondence to the relevant glyph but are for convenience only). Once 
the annotations were complete, I used the faceted search to study the anno- 
tated [h] characters by comparing unknown hands with known samples 
such as Scribe 1 and Scribe 2. I could then select annotations of particular 





13. This particular Archetype project is not available online but is housed on the author’s 
computer as a Docker image. 


Published by ScholarlyCommons, 


11 


Manuscript Studies, Vol. 5 [], Iss. 1, Art. 6 
Davis, Glyphs and Scribes | 171 





VoynichPal 


ft = Search — My Collection (40 Eal) 


Q 


Manuscript Image: BRBL MS 408: 93V (ecit in admin 





(=) Annotations (16)  Hands(1)  Texts(0) — OtherImages (43) | Document —_ image Copyright 
9 
Q Annotations XJ Y Unsaved [J fo = 2 y @0 
a 
es — 
? if ‘ os is i 
- a ledeecods) fees aehote i oe Baia 3 e ae Afenees OS) ceo geri) 
‘ giteco¥s avileds 4cffceor Pe: i 2 alte fad B 502 Set 
x fev? cro8s qocieo alfy aig eee alt @ e ee ae? ol 
tu Ap itceos9 exo! &. > exo Bay 
Pe cok cxok 49, » Bh 9 oa 
fevel i. oy ail L008 creas Been§ 2 ee eer ei 
iz jteome oe ae zy ‘erly ns, S| fg? a a 
ced ctfewod ee foese ee dfeewe W \ “elo deie Ae 
Pies eg 








is exo pis cag oe] allceey cireeo a 
fis o8treroSR Arete digg oe gk 99 Revco, 5 heox og is 2a Baw 
E gered ced olfen OP ceecag . 7 Zz f v4 


FIGURE 4. VoynichPal. 





interest to form a “Collection” and then send them from the Collection to 
the Lightbox. In the Lightbox, the annotations can be resized, labeled, 
manipulated, rotated, and sorted, resulting in the collection shown in fig- 
ure 5, where [h]s sharing particular paleographical features have been grouped 
together. 





No images selected 


Opacity 


Brightness 


Rotate 


Size 





FIGURE 5. VoynichPal Lightbox. 


https://repository.upenn.edu/mss_sims/vol5/iss1/6 12 


Davis: Digital Paleography and the Voynich Manuscript 


172 | JOURNAL FOR MANUSCRIPT STUDIES 


Loop: round or oval? Weiter ielateli 


rd 


Feet Crossbar: bowed fo) mm ae)ayde)a)t-| ita 
©] WV70) axe) al-me) ma AWYem-jige) (oie 





FIGURE 6. Paleographically significant features. 


As in Latin or vernacular paleography, the ductus of each variant of 
the character must be considered, determining and distinguishing features 
that are unique to each hand. The pertinent questions about the [h]—for 
example—might be as follows (fig. 6): 


¢ Are there feet at the bottom of either vertical? 

« Are the vertical strokes in fact vertical, or are they written at a slight 
angle? 

+ Is the glyph formed by one or two strokes? 

+ Is the crossbar bowed, or is it horizontal? This is directly related to the 
previous question, since a bowed bar tends to result from a smooth 
directional change from the top of the first vertical, while a horizontal 
crossbar is the result of lifting the quill after completing the vertical. 


+ Is the loop large or small, round or oval? 


My preliminary results identify five hands—the two defined by Prescott 
Currier as Scribe 1 and Scribe 2, and three more, designated Scribe 3, Scribe 
4, and Scribe 5. Two glyphs—circled in figure 7—will serve to distinguish 
between them. The [h] character in Scribe 1 is distinguished by a sharp 
angle at the top of the first vertical as the quill changes direction, a bowed 


Published by ScholarlyCommons, 


Manuscript Studies, Vol. 5 [], Iss. 1, Art. 6 
Davis, Glyphs and Scribes | 173 


crossbar, a round loop, and a very slight foot at the base of the second verti- 
cal. The word-end [m] and [n] glyphs conclude with a backward flourish 
that stretches as far as the penultimate minim. Scribe 2 is more cramped 
than Scribe 1, with a slightly slanted character. This scribe uses a horizon- 
tal, straight crossbar, an oval loop, and an upwardly angled final tick. The 
final backstroke of [m] and [n] is short, barely passing the final minim. The 
[h] written by Scribe 3 is similar to that of Scribe 1, although slightly more 
compact. The final stroke of [m] and [n] curves back on itself, nearly touch- 
ing the top of the final minim. The [h] written by Scribe 4 has a perpen- 
dicular crossbar, an oversize loop, and a prominent final foot. The final 
stroke of [m] and [n] is tall, with only a slight curvature. For Scribe 5, the 
[h] is tall and narrow, with a bowed cross-stroke that begins at the top of 
the vertical, and a minuscule tick at the foot of the second vertical. The [m] 
has a long, low finial that finishes above the penultimate minim. 

In the Voynich Manuscript, scribal output relates directly to both the 
codicological structure of the manuscript and its textual sections in several 
different ways that demonstrate the nature of the collaboration between the 
scribes and that may shed light on the linguistic origins of the manuscript. 
The Voynich Manuscript is traditionally divided into six thematic sections: 


Nec ao 8K eel \\ s6fe9) loco foe aa 
= ven? Gow : NE 3} fa\ oe Oey i alta q 
© Hogg roy ae oc \ . fo, . ) Fa f |? offa? &o 


Hobe etacFey s A} i c& a ‘| 


: a ea 


Or a 08 \ 












faked Lal 


<3 









Rvase & cre 
airad ie. 3 | 4 


peel: 4 296 


o8q cree - Se 
5 olliod 
Sa me ») Sag oO” 
} a ok Fe, Site pi ae 
pee od aa exda Neo Se 


FIGURE 7. Voynich scribes and distinctive glyphs. 










2 we Le cece 


S 



















https://repository.upenn.edu/mss_sims/vol5/iss1/6 


Davis: Digital Paleography and the Voynich Manuscript 


174 | JOURNAL FOR MANUSCRIPT STUDIES 


botanical, astronomical/astrological, balneological, the “Rose” foldout that 
defies categorization, recipes, and a textual section in which each paragraph 
is marked by a marginal star. The collation of the Voynich Manuscript and 
the identification of the former positions of the fourteen known-to-be- 
missing leaves are possible because of quiremarks that are slightly later than 
the manuscript itself and skips in the seventeenth-century foliation, which 
predates the losses. 

The current structure of the Voynich Manuscript, composed of 116 out 
of at least 130 leaves, is summarized in this collation formula: 1°, 2°! (lack- 
ing fol. 12), 3-78, 8'°° (lacking fols. 59-64), 9-11? (foldouts), 127" (lacking 
fol. 74), 13'°, 14' (nine-panel Rose foldout), 15‘ (nested foldouts), 16°“ (lack- 
ing fols. 91-92, 97-98), 17* (nested foldouts), 18'*'? (lacking fols. 109-10). It 
is quite possible that the structure has changed since the manuscript was 
first written: the codex was rebound in its current limp vellum in the early- 
modern period (probably in the sixteenth century). In addition, some of the 
bifolia and single-leaf foldouts can be shown to have been reoriented either 
before the current foliation was added or after the quiremarks were written. 
For an example of the former, see the bifolium 78v/81r, where the water- 
spouts at the left center of folio 78v spill across the gutter to meet corre- 
sponding streams with coordinating ranks of women in pools on the 
conjoint folio 81r, suggesting that this bifolium was originally both conjoint 
and consecutive, serving as the innermost bifolium of the quire (it is cur- 
rently the second bifolium from the center).'* For the latter, see Quire 9— 
the foldout that currently comprises folios 67/68—which retains old binding 
holes in a fold to the right of the quiremark (which is at the bottom of folio 
67r), a sewing placement that would be consistent with the now-incongruous 
location of the quiremark." 

The botanical section takes up the first seven quires, each of which 
comprises four nested bifolia. Currier’s analysis of this section is correct: 





14 For fol. 78v, see https://brbl-media library.yale.edu/images/1006215_quarter.jpg; for 
fol. 81r, see https://brbl-media.library.yale.edu/images/1006220_quarter.jpg (accessed 24 
May 2019). 

15 See https://brbl-media.library.yale.edu/images/1006194_quarter.jpg (accessed 24 May 
2019). 


Published by ScholarlyCommons, 


15 


Manuscript Studies, Vol. 5 [], Iss. 1, Art. 6 
Davis, Glyphs and Scribes | 175 


Quires 1-3 are written entirely by Scribe 1, and Scribes 1 and 2 collaborate 
on Quires 4-7, with Scribe 5 making a previously unnoticed appearance on 
one bifolium of Quire 6 (Currier identified this bifolium as having been 
written by Scribe 2, an attribution that has been universally accepted until 
now). It was in fact Currier who first observed that, in the botanical section 
of the manuscript, Scribes 1 and 2 appear not on separate leaves or quires, 
but on separate bifolia that are mixed together in the quires. In Quire 4, 
for example, the outermost bifolium (fols. 25/32) was entirely written by 
Scribe 1, while the next bifolium (fols. 26/31) was written entirely by Scribe 
2 (fig. 8). This mixing of bifolia continues through the end of Quire 7, folio 





Quire 4, Bitotum 25, 32> 





| Botanical 
| Botanical 


| Botanical 
| Botanical 





| Botanical 
| Botanical 


| Botanical 
| Botanical 


| Botanical 
| Botanical 


| Botanical 
| Botanical 


| Botanical 
| Botanical 
| Botanical 
| Botanical 














FIGURE 8. Quire 4 visualization (using VisColl). 


https://repository.upenn.edu/mss_sims/vol5/iss1/6 


16 


Davis: Digital Paleography and the Voynich Manuscript 


176 | JOURNAL FOR MANUSCRIPT STUDIES 


56. This very unusual collaboration method bears emphasizing: the work of 
Scribes 1 and 2 (and 5) in the botanical section varies by bifolia—not by 
page, text, or quire. 

Quire 8 was originally five bifolia, but only the two outermost are extant. 
Here, we encounter a different method of collaboration: Scribe 1 wrote folio 
57v, while Scribe 5 wrote the other three pages of this bifolium (fols. 57r, 
66r, and 66v). Scribe 3 writes the entirety of the next bifolium (fols. 58 and 
65). Folio 57v is somewhat problematic: there is too little text to reliably run 
Currier’s dialect tests, and much of the text is composed of extremely rare 
characters, making a paleographical analysis difficult (see fig. 3). The script 
shares significant features with Scribe 1. 

Scribe 4 writes the next four quires (9-12), the astronomical and zodia- 
cal foldouts. Quire 13 (the balneological section) is entirely written by 
Scribe 2. Quire 14 is the famed “Rose” foldout, with six panels on the 
obverse written by Scribe 2 and the nine-segment Rose on the other side 
apparently (but not definitely) written by Scribe 4. Quire 15 is composed of 
two nested foldouts written by Scribe 1. Both foldouts are likely misbound: 
the outer foldout is a series of botanical pages that would seem to have been 
intended for the first section of the manuscript, while the inner foldout 
presages the section of apparent recipes that appears later in the manuscript. 
Quire 16 was originally a quaternion but is missing its original outer two 
bifolia. Of the two botanical bifolia that are left, the outermost was written 
entirely by Scribe 1 and the inner entirely by Scribe 3. Quire 17 (recipes) is 
made up of two nested foldouts written by Scribe 1. The manuscript ends 
with the supersized Quire 18, originally seven nested bifolia on which are 
written several hundred starred paragraphs. The innermost bifolium is 
missing. The entire Quire is written by Scribe 3 with the exception of folio 
115r, where the first twelve lines were written by Scribe 2." 

The associations of section, quire, and scribe are summarized in Table 1. 
These conclusions, preliminary as they are, have important implications 
for understanding the process of creating the Voynich Manuscript, the 





16 See https://brbl-media. library .yale.edu/images/1006274_quarter.jpg (accessed 24 May 
2019). 


Published by ScholarlyCommons, 


Manuscript Studies, Vol. 5 [], Iss. 1, Art. 6 
Davis, Glyphs and Scribes | 177 


TABLE 1. 
Structure 
Section Quire Folios Scribe (for mixed quires) 
Botanica ik 1-8 1 
Botanica 2 9-16 1 (fol. 12 lacking) 
Botanica 3 17-24 1 
Botanica 4 25 1 
Botanica 26 2 
Botanica 27 1 
Botanica 28 1 
Botanica 29 1 ») 
Botanica 30 1 
Botanica 31 2 
Botanica 32 1 
Botanica 5 33 2 
Botanica 34 2 
Botanica 35 1 
Botanica 36 1 
Botanica 37 1 » 
Botanica 38 1 
Botanica 39 2 
Botanica 40 2 
Botanica 6 41 5 
Botanica 42 1 
Botanica 43 2 
Botanica 44 1 
Botanica 45 1 » 
Botanica 46 2 
Botanica 47 1 
Botanica 48 5 
Botanica 7 49 1 
Botanica 50 2 
Botanica 51 1 
Botanica 52 1 
Botanica 53 1 ») 
Botanica 54 1 
Botanica 55 2 
Botanica 56 1 





https://repository.upenn.edu/mss_sims/vol5/iss1/6 18 


Davis: Digital Paleography and the Voynich Manuscript 


178 | JOURNAL FOR MANUSCRIPT STUDIES 


Section Quire 
Botanical 8 


Botanical 





Botanical 
Botanical 


Zodiac/ 9 


Astronomy 


Zodiac/ 10 


Astronomy 


Zodiac/ 11 


Astronomy 


Zodiac/ 12 


Astronomy 
Balneology 13 
Rose 14 


Botanical/ 15 
Recipes 


[unknown] 16 
[unknown] 

Botanical 

Botanical 

Botanical 

Botanical 

[unknown] 

[unknown] 

Recipes 17 
Starred 18 
paragraphs 


Published by ScholarlyCommons, 


Folios 
57 
58 
39 
60 
61 
62 
63 
64 
65 
66 

67-68 


69-70 


71-72 


73 


75-84 
85-86 
87-90 


91 

92 

93 

94 

95 

96 

97 

98 
99-102 
103-116 


Structure 
Scribe (for mixed quires) 
5/1 
3 
lacking 
lacking 
lacking 


U 


lacking 
lacking 
lacking 

3 

5 

4 


4 (fol. 74 lacking) 


2,4 


lacking 
lacking 


lacking 
lacking 
1 


3(20n115r) = (fols. 109-110 
lacking) 


19 


Manuscript Studies, Vol. 5 [], Iss. 1, Art. 6 
Davis, Glyphs and Scribes | 179 


collaborative nature of the undertaking, and the establishment of new direc- 
tions for linguistic research. 

Scribal output in Quires 4—8 and in Quire 16 is defined by bifolia, not 
by texts, quires, or leaves. In the botanical portion of the manuscript, 
each page is a semantic unit, depicting and, presumably, describing a 
single plant. The variation of scribal work by bifolia may suggest that the 
order of leaves in this section was irrelevant. Alternatively, the bifolia may 
have been reordered before the manuscript was foliated in the early- 
modern period. Further investigations will include a careful analysis of 
relevant bifolia for signs of reordering such as unmatched offsets of ink, 
pigment, or stains. 

There are two other places in the manuscript where scribes collaborate 
in ways that are codicologically significant: on the Rose foldout, where 
Scribe 2 writes on one side and Scribe 4 on the other, and on folio 115 recto, 
where Scribe 2 writes the first twelve lines before Scribe 3 takes over. The 
fact that all of these collaborative methods involve Scribe 2 may suggest 
that she or he was in charge of the project in one way or another. 

It was Currier who first determined that Scribe 1 writes in Dialect A and 
that Scribe 2 writes in Dialect B. The other three scribes I have identified—3, 
4, and 5—also use Dialect B, at least according to the tests developed by 
Currier.'’ I have sent my preliminary results to a professor of linguistics 
who is running several different linguistical analyses on the Voynich as part 
of a long-term class project and her own research. I have suggested that the 
work of the five scribes be analyzed separately to look for patterns that may 
distinguish them further. The preliminary results of these analyses are 
forthcoming. 

It is my hope that these conclusions will be useful to all Voynichologists, 
whether they are linguists, cryptologists, botanists, or medical historians. 
There are still many fundamental things we do not know about the Voynich 
Manuscript, but there are some things we do know: the date of origin, the 





17 See “2. The Matter of “Language,” http://www.voynich.nu/extra/curr_main.html 
(accessed 24 May 2019). 


https://repository.upenn.edu/mss_sims/vol5/iss1/6 


20 


Davis: Digital Paleography and the Voynich Manuscript 


180 | JouRNAL FOR MANUSCRIPT STUDIES 


use of at least two dialects, the provenance, the codicological structure. To 
these we can now add the number of scribes and an understanding of the 
collaborative nature of its creation. Any potential “solution” or reading of 
the Voynich Manuscript must take these facts into account, combining 
them with an interpretation of the text and images to unravel the enigma 
that is the Voynich. 


Published by ScholarlyCommons, 


21 


